now let's get back to why I am the worst
the absolute worst worse than Oni Theon
proven to have no positive effect aside
from what's called the enhanced placebo
which he thinks is just nothing more
than a placebo so anybody out there
who's struggling with anxiety or
depression if you are on a drug for that
an SSRI more specifically in this case
of what he's talking about I just hope
you know that this is purely placebo
[Music]
early in February actually in 2008 an
analysis of antidepressant medications
that I did with some colleagues was
published in the medical journal PLoS
Medicine I woke up that morning to find
that our study had become the lead
front-page news and virtually all of the
UK daily newspapers two years later was
still making news of the four-page cover
story in Newsweek and two years after
that this came on television the medical
community is at war battling over the
scientific research and writings of a
psychologist named Irving Kirsch so how
did this all come about and to tell you
that story I have to go back to 1998
so we combed the literature now is not
enough to look at the placebo effect
because you know if you if you have a
cold and I give you a placebo and I
measure how you're doing a week later
you'll have gotten better right it's not
a placebo effect that's just the passage
of time Natural History so just as to
measure the drug effect you need to have
a placebo control to measure the placebo
effect you have to have a control for
natural history so what would happen if
you didn't get the placebo and so we
scoured the literature and we were
looking for for trials clinical studies
in which depressed patients had been
randomized to either get a placebo or
get no treatment at all being placed
let's say on a waiting list and getting
treatment later now as it turns out the
only place we could find data on the
patience yet being given placebo was in
drug trials so that meant that we had
the drug trial data when you have data
you analyze it and what we're looking
here is change creat a post in the drug
condition and you get a standardized
mean difference different outcome scales
about 1.5 that's a big healthy effect
and change improvement in medical
literature and the nice big placebo
response and very little improvement
much less improvement in the no
treatment condition so that means we do
have a real placebo effect it turns out
about 25 percent of the response to the
active medication you get anyway even
without doing anything you get another
50 percent of it by giving an inner pill
a placebo
that's the placebo effect in the
treatment of depression fine great
that's what we were interested in but
now there's a surprise that leaves only
25% of the response as a true drug
effect and that seemed to both gyein and
and me to be too small for a treatment
that had been heralded as constituting a
revolution in the treatment of
depression right now I can't like I
usually do I tried talking to my doctor
tonigh percent of psychiatrist and I got
prescribed antidepressants and I've been
taking down since two weeks it has a lot
of side effects easier because one of
the side effects is to decrease anxiety
and but you still get anxiety as a side
effect sometimes and another other side
effects are headaches insomnia nausea
and all
appetite and for some reason I'm
experiencing all the side-effects mr.
Blunt has virtually no signs of his
original illness now the signs that the
movements of his mouth are completely
side effects of the drugs that he was on
for 20 years
mr. Brown is quite rational he
understands what's going on and if
you're patient he can carry on a very
rational conversation with you the
movements that he makes with his mouth
and with his tongue he can't stop their
involuntary movements he can slow them
down by concentrating on them but as
soon as he stops concentrating on them
then they come back and are more mr.
blown also has some movements of his
diaphragm when the diaphragm contracted
then it causes him to make sounds out of
his mouth but that's all part of the
same condition if it was not for the
side effects of the drugs mr. blunt
would in all probability be able to
leave the hospital
[Music]
FTC period until next time ask yourself
a teaspoon here to sell more about
diversified asset are you too skinny see
sorry oppa - a saint in Sedna are the
England miss feast of Italians what
unknown tagowit are you too skinny see
after email at all - be happening for
neuroleptic entirety Tico and Atacama
supported study writing I received some
essential for me Teresa Hyneman even
tell me cos no lipstick apprehending
thre Oh too skinny she was held in the
present on ax men take cigar Mecca
salinity forces upon your lips iike sati
in kanji are known for Sarah Merrell no
lipstick Avastin illegal or declare norm
so she ate steam SEC and a salon
ruefully muscular prevails a man Tigers
a big file mainly associate summary oh
what a diagnosis it are known as a level
as I said is an incident just tuned in
some authority pizza salon crafty mostly
spaceman some curvy Irma's Mary fool
Esaias Elmo Elmo's kid means - hoo-ha
hoo-ha f30 here can see four fairly
scale Vietnam City will be clearly
demarcate same percentage yet say Sasuke
did a Mata ki simply need faded I didn't
know where to go first to talk about my
symptoms actually thought that nothing
like was wrong I have been put on
medication I went to a psychiatrist at
the hospital and
I told them my symptoms and and I got I
know they got medication prescribed I
was told that the side effects would go
away I was told that the side effects
would go away within a couple of weeks
so I'm waiting for them to be over so in
the early part of the 20th century
generally it was felt that there were no
there was no way of really targeting the
biological origins of mental disorders
and the treatment for people who were
considered to be mad crazy depressed
whatever was very nonspecific akin
consisted of helping them to be in a
creating a structured environment for
them where there were activities they
could do where there was work they could
get involved in giving them fresh air
and exercise
and and if they were very disturbed
using sedative type drugs but those
drugs were not seen as doing anything
that was related to the origins of their
problem they were seen as as sedatives
as chemical straight jackets or
restraints if you like so that was the
situation in the early 20th century and
then in the 1930s and 40s various
physical treatment procedures start to
be introduced into psychiatry like
insulin coma therapy for example and
then later ECT electroconvulsive therapy
now these treatments are start to be
spoken of and represented as if they are
somehow targeting the underlying basis
of a particular mental condition so
incident coma therapy for example even
though no one knew for certain what it
was doing people speculated that it was
working by targeting the underlying
basis of schizophrenia so so it was
significant for that for that reason
that psychiatrists even though it's not
the case psychiatrists started to
believe when incident coma therapy came
in that they had
specific treatment that targeted the
underlying biological mechanism that
produced schizophrenia or the symptoms
of schizophrenia and the same sort of
thing happens with ECT electroconvulsive
therapy is introduced again for the
treatment of schizophrenia but it
becomes more associated in the
literature anyway with the treatment of
severe depression or melancholia or
sometimes manic depression and again
even though people have no real idea how
it might be working in depression
there's this idea that somehow it's
acting on the underlying biological
mechanisms that produce depression so by
the 1950s psychiatry has gone from a
state where it really didn't believe it
was possible have any treatments that
were thought to be specifically
targeting the biological processes
underlying mental disorders to a
situation where it is believed commonly
believed that there are two treatments
that asked that specifically target two
of the main psychiatric disorders
incident coma therapy for schizophrenia
and ect for depression or manic
depression not surprisingly turned out
to be very controversial and one of the
most serious criticisms was that our
analysis was flawed that derived from a
minuscule group of unrepresentative
inconsistently and erroneously selected
articles what are we going to do well
what we did was try to replicate our own
meta analysis and we did that by where
we gonna find another dataset that
doesn't overlap ours and see if we can
get similar results or not we went to
the FDA and we use the Freedom of
Information Act and we've got from them
all of the data that the drug companies
had sent to them in the process of
getting approval for what at that time
were the six
widely prescribed antidepressant
medication well if you look at the
published trials you'll find that three
out of four of them show a significant
benefit of drug versus placebo if you
look at the unpublished trials that
shrinks 12% now we had the published
trials the unpublished trials we put
them all together we did the same kind
of analysis that we did before and we
get this nice healthy response on
average to get being given the
antidepressant drug and of an even
bigger response
I'm Lucy Bowe now it's the placebo
response not the SIBO effect but we know
that that counts for relatively little
the-the-the spontaneous remission the
natural history the placebo response is
now accounted for eighty-two percent of
the response to the active drug and the
difference between drug and approval is
less than two points on the Hamilton
scale now the Hamilton scale can you can
have scores ranging from zero to fifty
three points you can get a six point
difference just by changes in sleep
patterns with no changes in any other
symptom of depression that's a small
difference and you don't have to take my
word for it because there's an
organization in England called the
National Institute of Health and
Clinical Excellence the acronym is nice
and they're very nice organization what
they do is to set treatment guidelines
for the National Health Service and in
revising their treatment guidelines they
have established a criteria for clinical
significance for saying that a drug is
not only statistically but clinically
better than a placebo and that's a three
point difference on the Hamilton
depression scale or an effect size of
0.5 and as you see that comes nowhere
close when you look at it historically
you realize that that idea first came
about in
context of treatment or the treatment ie
insulin coma therapy that we now know
was completely useless not only useless
but highly dangerous but but certainly
no one would now defend the idea that
incident coma therapy was specifically
treating schizophrenia specifically
targeting the biological cause of
schizophrenia this was a really good day
and they felt really stable and
sometimes you like really get happy like
like this yeah I will take it easy and
not let these side-effects affect me too
much well it's getting better
yay I must have seemed really weird at
the start of the video but like it was
really difficult to like turn on the
camera camera but I'm still glad I did
it
Wow good good I probably feel like [ __ ]
again like in a couple of hours but
thank you it's a good band-aid it's
wishful thinking basically it's wishful
thinking that I think is probably quite
deep-seated and people who have a
medical training because because that's
what medicine aims for it aims to find
the ultimate causes of things and um
that the mechanisms which produce
symptoms and it aims to be able to
target those mechanisms in some way well
we published this second meta-analysis
in 2002 and the critics complained that
a patient's weren't depressed enough you
see they said sure if you give
antidepressants to mildly depressed
patients or moderately depressed
patients what you're going to see is
probably a placebo effect there won't be
much difference between the drug and
effect and see both effect but you know
we see severely depressed patients and
in severely depressed patients that's
where you'll see that the drug really
does make a difference well ok that's a
plausible argument what are we going to
do now well let's go back to our data
and let's see how severely depressed on
average the patients were at baseline
before being given drug or placebo as it
turned out there was only one study on
patients with moderate levels of
depression none and mild depression one
study in the early study of prozac early
to clinical trial prozac showed
absolutely no difference between drug
and placebo
there weren't any studies of patients
with severe depression all of the rest
of the studies were on patients with
very severe depression according to the
categorization used by both the American
Psychiatric Association and by nice we
did find within very severe depression
there was a relationship between drug
placebo difference its effect size and
severity of depression and at the very
extreme very extreme levels of
depression there was a small group of
studies showing patients with scores 28
or above on the Hamilton Depression
Inventory show a benefit of
antidepressants that in fact passes the
criterion for clinical significance we
had 7% who were moderately depressed 78%
who were very severely depressed and
only 15% who were very severely
depressed but at the extreme end abut
going beyond 28% they benefited in this
data set that meant that about
eighty-five percent did not show a
clinically meaningful benefit as a
function of taking the active drug
doesn't that looks familiar and what
does that represent in terms of
distribution of patients well now we're
getting a clinically significant benefit
and about ten percent of the patients
when you include some mildly and some
severely depressed patients meaning that
90% of the patients were not showing you
benefited clinically meaningful benefit
and then there was the critics last
resort which is a true believer high
argument David Nutt in the UK said
antidepressants work everybody knows
they work and another critic wrote
clinical practice plus millions of
content patients can't be that wrong
well the history of medicine is replete
with treatments that have worked for
millions and that's why we don't depend
on anecdotal evidence for making
treatment decisions we do clinical
trials and we look at the data and if
you look at the data everybody gets the
same result here it's going to be now my
study with my colleagues our studies
nicest studies Turner in Canada my two
harshest critics they're my harshest
critics did two meta-analyses to show
that we were wrong the difference
between drug and placebo is small and
even the FDA agrees the reason that we
do randomized trials is that depression
like many other conditions is not
predictable so it's not the case that
you know we know that you become
depressed and we know you will stay like
that for at least a year for example and
therefore if you get better before a
year's time then we can say all you know
it was the antidepressant I made you
better
depression is not like that it's highly
variable on the heart and
fluctuates and therefore it is very
difficult to say if someone starts
feeling better whether it's due to the
weather it's due to something they've
done whether it's just what would have
happened anyway or whether it might be
due to some sort of new treatment that
they've been started on and that's why
we do trials and the trials show that
there is a very substantial placebo
response so that people feel you know a
lot better when they take up to sea boat
do almost as much better and there's
very little difference as they do if
they take an antidepressant the
difference between the small difference
that you see in trials between
antidepressants and placebos is probably
what you might call an active placebo
effect it's the fact that when people
take an antidepressant they're not just
taking a chalk tablet they're not taking
something that's inert they're taking an
active drug and they will notice some
more or less subtle changes from taking
that drug now most people again going
into antidepressant trials think once
the antidepressants the people who
really don't think hazard presence are
going to work for them other people who
don't go into those trials in the first
place
so if you've got a trial full of people
who mostly want antidepressants mostly
think they're going to be beneficial and
then they take you know they get
allocated to the antidepressant and they
get a few side effects you've set up a
situation where they're going to be
hopeful you know particularly hopeful
that they're going to that they're going
to get better and so I think you get an
enhanced placebo effect with the active
medication in antidepressant trials and
it doesn't matter if you look at the
short-term trials or you can find
yourselves to looking at the long-term
trials and it doesn't matter whether you
look at depression or you look at these
same drugs for the treatment of anxiety
disorders the difference is small
barbering colleagues they did a 16-week
trial comparing sertraline
to placebo and to inside oriented brief
inside oriented psychotherapy sixteen
week trial is very long for a drug trial
it's happens to be the length of trial
of the star D trial patients very much
like the patients who would be excluded
from conventional clinical trials many
of them economically disadvantaged high
level of comorbidity chronically
depressed and here's the part I like
best non-responders at week eight people
halfway through the trial they didn't
respond to search Raeleen they were
switched to venlafaxine good you know
when drug doesn't work to try another
non-responders in the placebo group or
switched to a different recibo that's
the part of the law
here's what they got in the drug group
here's what they got in the placebo
group virtually no difference at all and
the same level of response that you're
getting in the star D trial and
certainly no drug effect when we did our
first meta-analysis back in nineteen
ninety eight died sacristy and I when we
first saw those data we assumed we must
have done something wrong something is
not right here everyone knows that
antidepressants work maybe maybe we made
the mistake of including drugs that were
effective for depression as well as
drugs that weren't effective for
depression if we had done that maybe
some antidepressants are better than
others and if we're including Studies on
ineffective drugs that's going to lead
us to underestimates the potential of
antidepressants to ameliorate depression
and maybe overestimate the placebo
component of it so we went back to our
data
and we look at looked at what drugs were
the patients in these studies ah
somewhere on tricyclics somewhere on
assess our eyes somewhere on other
antidepressants and excluded em Aiello
inhibitors and things like that and we
found there were some other drugs in
there too there was some studies that
were looking at things like barbiturates
and benzodiazepine and lithium for not
for unipolar depression and thyroid
medications for people without a thyroid
disorder unipolar depressed patients and
in case after case three-quarters of the
response of the drug was duplicated by
placebo it didn't matter whether was a
try cyclic an SSRI some other
antidepressant or even something that's
not conventionally considered an
antidepressant here are results from
meta-analyses of head-to-head
comparisons between in this case SSRI
and other antidepressants MDR eye sight
rice eye so these are all comparator
trials nope placebo controls
head-to-head comparisons response rates
they're all the same they're all the
same and there's yet another drug that
we should take into account that I don't
have up here and that is TNF t how many
of you have heard of TNF t very few TNF
teen is a drug that is has been approved
by French regulators and it is marketed
in France and a number of other
countries as an antidepressant
the most common antidepressants these
days are SSRIs selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors TNF teen is an SS ar
e it's a selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors are eyes are supposed to do
instead
inhibiting the reuptake so that there's
more serotonin available in the synapses
it's supposed to enhance reuptake so
that there's less serotonin available in
the synapses were there any truth to the
serotonin theory of depression and I
don't know a responsible researcher in
the area that still contends there is
it's only in marketing least they'll see
that talked about were there any truth
to that
SSRIs art should not help people recover
from depression it ought to make them
depressed here's what it does in
head-to-head trials against both SSRIs
and imipramine and tricyclics so what do
you call pills the effects of which are
independent of their chemical
composition and they should be taken
with a grain of salt just because
somebody appears on the dr. Phil show
claiming that she's pregnant with the
reincarnation of Jesus Christ doesn't
necessarily make it so just because
someone appears on dr. Phil and claims
that the rapper Eminem is her biological
father doesn't make it necessarily so if
you describe yourself with the word
skeptic if you have a youtube channel
and the word skeptic is in the name of
your channel you're supposed to be one
of the people on the side that asks
careful methodological sound questions
before leaping to conclusions before
believing or assuming anything that
reaches beyond direct empirical
experience and that's a tradition that
goes back to ancient Rome and ancient
Greece and each and author called sexist
and Perkis and there's only one
one modern idea in the philosophy one
thing that was added to this in the 20th
century and that's the concept of
falsifiability that was developed and
promoted by the philosopher the
scientific method known as call popper
he did philosophy of science what if you
want to call it
okay what's the opposite of skepticism
the opposite of skepticism is dogmatism
skeptics should not really be
embarrassed to be wrong being wrong is
something that happens to human beings
you might really find it convincing when
you're on PewDiePie's channel watching
that video letting you know that a young
woman is pregnant with the next
incarnation of Jesus and her biological
father is mmm which would technically
mean that mmm is God fascinating
fascinating and shout out to PewDiePie
thank you for bringing me up to date
with this story thank you for poisoning
a / enriching my life and mind with this
completely trivial news story through
doctor dr. Phil show the opposite of
skepticism is dogmatism and it is
dangerous dangerous in the truest sense
the word when you have someone who
dogmatically propounds dogmatically
believes something as simple as the
claim that quote antidepressants solve a
chemical imbalance in the brain it
wouldn't take a genius to just read the
fine print that's now written on every
bottle of Prozac you wouldn't take a
genius to do a little bit of google
searching and a little bit of
fact-checking and to realize how
genuinely contestable these claims are
and even if you don't come to a
conclusion to do that most basic thing
that skepticism requires skepticism
isn't about coming to conclusion
skepticism isn't about always being
right skepticism isn't about never being
wrong being wrong is something happens
to human beings and it's part of the
scientific process skepticism is about
admitting to yourself when you do not
know I didn't know where to go first to
talk about nice
simple actually thought that nothing
fake was wrong the people who are harmed
by these drugs are reaching out for help
these drugs end up hurting people who
are weak and they end up hurting strong
people at moments in their lives at
times in their lives when they're at
their weakest it's exactly when they're
most devastated distracted and
demoralized when they can't take the
time to get on google get on you to get
on Wikipedia and figure out these facts
lurking behind the figures when they
can't scrutinize what their doctor or
psychiatrist is telling them and that's
why I say again please do your small
part share this video share it with
someone you love
share with someone you're concerned
about Cher it so that we can help the
whole world catch up with what dr.
Irving Kirsch already knew in 1998 I
mean people like to disrespect my truth
but the fact is that you know my name is
I don't know